admin/technical/guides/docker-containerization-guide.md, before:

# Docker Containerization Guide

**Last Updated**: October 1, 2025  
**Status**: ✅ FULLY FUNCTIONAL

## 🐳 **Current Docker Setup**

### **Architecture**
- **Multi-stage build**: Frontend (Node.js) + Backend (Python/Flask)
- **Services**: Main app container + Redis container
- **Web Server**: Nginx reverse proxy
- **Database**: SQLite with persistent storage

### **Container Configuration**

#### **Main Application Container**
- **Base Image**: `python:3.13-slim`
- **Frontend**: Built with Node.js 20 Alpine, served via Nginx
- **Backend**: Flask application with all dependencies
- **Database**: SQLite with automatic migrations
- **Data Seeding**: All 386 Pokemon (Generations 1-3) seeded on startup

#### **Redis Container**
- **Image**: `redis:7-alpine`
- **Purpose**: Caching and session storage
- **Health Checks**: Automatic health monitoring

## 🚀 **Quick Start**

### **Development**
```bash
# Build and start all services
docker compose up --build -d

# Check status
docker compose ps

# View logs
docker compose logs pokedex-app
docker compose logs redis

# Stop services
docker compose down
```

### **Access Points**
- **Frontend**: http://localhost/
- **API**: http://localhost/api/v1/
- **Redis**: localhost:6379

## 📊 **Current Features Verified**

### **✅ Working in Containers**
- **Pokemon Data**: All 386 Pokemon seeded (Gen 1-3)
- **API Endpoints**: All REST endpoints functional
- **Generation Filtering**: Kanto, Johto, Hoenn filters working
- **Frontend**: React app with all features
- **Authentication**: JWT-based auth system
- **Favorites**: User favorites system
- **Search & Pagination**: Full search and pagination
- **Health Checks**: Container health monitoring

### **✅ Performance**
- **Build Time**: ~2-3 minutes for full rebuild
- **Startup Time**: ~30-45 seconds for full initialization
- **Memory Usage**: ~200-300MB per container
- **API Response**: <100ms for typical requests

## 🔧 **Technical Details**

### **Dockerfile Structure**
1. **Stage 1 (Frontend Builder)**:
   - Node.js 20 Alpine
   - Install dependencies
   - Build production bundle

2. **Stage 2 (Main Container)**:
   - Python 3.13 slim
   - Install system dependencies (Redis, SQLite, Nginx, curl)
   - Install Python dependencies
   - Copy backend code and migrations
   - Copy built frontend
   - Configure Nginx
   - Set up startup script

### **Startup Sequence**
1. Start Redis server
2. Run database migrations
3. Seed Pokemon data (386 Pokemon)
4. Start Flask application
5. Start Nginx reverse proxy

### **Environment Variables**
```bash
FLASK_ENV=production
DATABASE_URL=sqlite:////app/instance/pokedex_dev.db
REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379/0
SECRET_KEY=dev-secret-key
JWT_SECRET_KEY=dev-jwt-secret
```

## 🛠 **Troubleshooting**

### **Common Issues**

#### **502 Bad Gateway**
- **Cause**: Flask app still starting up
- **Solution**: Wait 30-45 seconds for full initialization
- **Check**: `docker compose logs pokedex-app`

#### **Build Failures**
- **Cause**: TypeScript errors in frontend
- **Solution**: Fix TypeScript issues before building
- **Check**: `npm run build` locally first

#### **Database Issues**
- **Cause**: Migration or seeding problems
- **Solution**: Check logs for specific errors
- **Reset**: `docker compose down -v` (removes volumes)

### **Health Checks**
```bash
# Check container health
docker compose ps

# Test API endpoints
curl http://localhost/api/v1/pokemon?per_page=5
curl http://localhost/api/v1/pokemon/generations

# Test frontend
curl http://localhost/
```

## 📈 **Performance Optimization**

### **Build Optimization**
- Multi-stage build reduces final image size
- Layer caching for faster rebuilds
- Frontend assets cached for 1 year
- API responses not cached (always fresh)

### **Runtime Optimization**
- Redis for caching frequently accessed data
- SQLite with performance indexes
- Nginx reverse proxy for efficient serving
- Health checks for automatic recovery

## 🔄 **Updates and Maintenance**

### **Adding New Features**
1. Update code locally
2. Test with `docker compose up --build`
3. Verify all endpoints work
4. Commit changes

### **Database Updates**
- Migrations run automatically on startup
- Pokemon seeding happens after migrations
- Data persists in Docker volumes

### **Dependency Updates**
- Update `requirements.txt` for Python deps
- Update `frontend/package.json` for Node deps
- Rebuild containers to apply changes

## ✅ **Verification Checklist**

- [ ] Docker build completes successfully
- [ ] All containers start and show healthy status
- [ ] Frontend loads at http://localhost/
- [ ] API responds at http://localhost/api/v1/pokemon
- [ ] All 386 Pokemon are seeded
- [ ] Generation filtering works
- [ ] Authentication system functional
- [ ] Health checks passing
- [ ] Logs show no critical errors

## 🎯 **Next Steps**

- **Production Deployment**: Configure for production environment
- **Monitoring**: Add application monitoring and logging
- **Scaling**: Consider multi-container deployment
- **Security**: Implement production security measures
- **CI/CD**: Integrate with automated deployment pipeline

Commit message:

feat: Docker containerization updates and ignore files cleanup
- Updated Dockerfile for new project structure (backend/instance path)
- Updated docker-compose.yml database path configuration
- Added comprehensive Docker containerization guide documentation
- Cleaned up .dockerignore (348→65 lines) and .gitignore (560→105 lines)
- Removed massive duplication and unnecessary entries
- Verified no sensitive files (.env, .db, logs) are being committed
- Tested fresh build - all functionality working perfectly
- Multi-stage build: Frontend (Node.js) + Backend (Python) + Nginx
- Single container architecture with embedded nginx reverse proxy

admin/technical/guides/docker-containerization-guide.md, after:

# Docker Containerization Guide

**Last Updated**: October 1, 2025  
**Status**: ✅ FULLY FUNCTIONAL

## 🐳 **Current Docker Setup**

### **How Docker Compose Works**
```yaml
# docker-compose.yml
services:
  pokedex-app:
    build: .  # ← This tells Docker to use the Dockerfile in the root directory
```

**The Flow:**
1. `docker compose up` reads `docker-compose.yml`
2. Sees `build: .` for `pokedex-app` service
3. Runs `docker build .` using the `Dockerfile`
4. Creates the container with all the multi-stage build steps
5. Starts the container with the configured environment

### **Architecture**
- **Multi-stage build**: Frontend (Node.js) + Backend (Python/Flask)
- **Services**: Main app container + Redis container
- **Web Server**: Nginx reverse proxy (embedded in main container)
- **Database**: SQLite with persistent storage

### **Container Configuration**

#### **Main Application Container**
- **Base Image**: `python:3.13-slim`
- **Frontend**: Built with Node.js 20 Alpine, served via Nginx
- **Backend**: Flask application with all dependencies
- **Database**: SQLite with automatic migrations
- **Data Seeding**: All 386 Pokemon (Generations 1-3) seeded on startup

#### **Redis Container**
- **Image**: `redis:7-alpine`
- **Purpose**: Caching and session storage
- **Health Checks**: Automatic health monitoring

## 🚀 **Quick Start**

### **Development**
```bash
# Build and start all services
docker compose up --build -d

# Check status
docker compose ps

# View logs
docker compose logs pokedex-app
docker compose logs redis

# Stop services
docker compose down
```

### **Access Points**
- **Frontend**: http://localhost/
- **API**: http://localhost/api/v1/
- **Redis**: localhost:6379

## 📊 **Current Features Verified**

### **✅ Working in Containers**
- **Pokemon Data**: All 386 Pokemon seeded (Gen 1-3)
- **API Endpoints**: All REST endpoints functional
- **Generation Filtering**: Kanto, Johto, Hoenn filters working
- **Frontend**: React app with all features
- **Authentication**: JWT-based auth system
- **Favorites**: User favorites system
- **Search & Pagination**: Full search and pagination
- **Health Checks**: Container health monitoring

### **✅ Performance**
- **Build Time**: ~2-3 minutes for full rebuild
- **Startup Time**: ~30-45 seconds for full initialization
- **Memory Usage**: ~200-300MB per container
- **API Response**: <100ms for typical requests

## 🔧 **Technical Details**

### **Dockerfile Structure**
1. **Stage 1 (Frontend Builder)**:
   - Node.js 20 Alpine
   - Install dependencies
   - Build production bundle

2. **Stage 2 (Main Container)**:
   - Python 3.13 slim
   - Install system dependencies (Redis, SQLite, Nginx, curl)
   - Install Python dependencies
   - Copy backend code and migrations
   - Copy built frontend
   - Configure Nginx
   - Set up startup script

### **Startup Sequence**
1. Start Redis server
2. Run database migrations
3. Seed Pokemon data (386 Pokemon)
4. Start Flask application
5. Start Nginx reverse proxy

### **Environment Variables**
```bash
FLASK_ENV=production
DATABASE_URL=sqlite:////app/instance/pokedex_dev.db
REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379/0
SECRET_KEY=dev-secret-key
JWT_SECRET_KEY=dev-jwt-secret
```

## 🛠 **Troubleshooting**

### **Common Issues**

#### **502 Bad Gateway**
- **Cause**: Flask app still starting up
- **Solution**: Wait 30-45 seconds for full initialization
- **Check**: `docker compose logs pokedex-app`

#### **Build Failures**
- **Cause**: TypeScript errors in frontend
- **Solution**: Fix TypeScript issues before building
- **Check**: `npm run build` locally first

#### **Database Issues**
- **Cause**: Migration or seeding problems
- **Solution**: Check logs for specific errors
- **Reset**: `docker compose down -v` (removes volumes)

### **Health Checks**
```bash
# Check container health
docker compose ps

# Test API endpoints
curl http://localhost/api/v1/pokemon?per_page=5
curl http://localhost/api/v1/pokemon/generations

# Test frontend
curl http://localhost/
```

## 📈 **Performance Optimization**

### **Build Optimization**
- Multi-stage build reduces final image size
- Layer caching for faster rebuilds
- Frontend assets cached for 1 year
- API responses not cached (always fresh)

### **Runtime Optimization**
- Redis for caching frequently accessed data
- SQLite with performance indexes
- Nginx reverse proxy for efficient serving
- Health checks for automatic recovery

## 🔄 **Updates and Maintenance**

### **Adding New Features**
1. Update code locally
2. Test with `docker compose up --build`
3. Verify all endpoints work
4. Commit changes

### **Database Updates**
- Migrations run automatically on startup
- Pokemon seeding happens after migrations
- Data persists in Docker volumes

### **Dependency Updates**
- Update `requirements.txt` for Python deps
- Update `frontend/package.json` for Node deps
- Rebuild containers to apply changes

## ✅ **Verification Checklist**

- [ ] Docker build completes successfully
- [ ] All containers start and show healthy status
- [ ] Frontend loads at http://localhost/
- [ ] API responds at http://localhost/api/v1/pokemon
- [ ] All 386 Pokemon are seeded
- [ ] Generation filtering works
- [ ] Authentication system functional
- [ ] Health checks passing
- [ ] Logs show no critical errors

## 🎯 **Next Steps**

- **Production Deployment**: Configure for production environment
- **Monitoring**: Add application monitoring and logging
- **Scaling**: Consider multi-container deployment
- **Security**: Implement production security measures
- **CI/CD**: Integrate with automated deployment pipeline
